---
layout: post
title: "Let's Discuss Accessibility in Air Travel"
author: a4eorg
categories: [ Travel, Inclusion, Advocacy ]
image: assets/images/2024-04-17-accessibility-in-air-travel.webp
tags: [accessibility, disabled travelers, aviation industry, wheelchair use, lived experiences]
---
The world is a book, and those who do not travel read only one page - Saint Augustine.
Travel is inarguably one of the best ways to get a bird's eye view of the ways of the world around you. People travel to gain experiences, make memories, explore, and learn about different people and their worlds. 
If you are one of those people – an avid traveller or explorer - I want you to stop reading.
Imagine that you have been denied access to all your favourite places, that you are unable to see and explore all that you want, and it feels as if you are caged in one place, looking at the same monotonous sights around you. How would you feel to be denied the right to behold all the beauty in the world? Suffocated, perhaps even stifled. 
Now, visualise that you've been denied what you thought was your basic right simply because you do not fit into the mainstream definition of 'normal' and the world is not built to cater to your needs. That is how I, and a lot of other wheelchair users, feel. We would love to be able to take off to exotic, picturesque locations now and then, but we have been denied this simple joy of life. The society we live in does not find it necessary to cater to our needs and denies us access solely because of our physical impairment. Accessing these locations is a secondary problem; our right to be treated at par is primary. Our dreams of gallivanting globally cannot be thwarted before we reach any of these places just because we are different. One of the first things travelling requires is a mode of transport to commute. While railways and taxis never make it to our choice of conveyance, flights do. Although flights are relatively accessible, they pose their challenges. Most of these challenges stem from biases of people in the aviation industry, which lead to the ground staff being untrained to handle the issues faced by a passenger with a disability. 
The lack of conversation about people with disabilities, their needs and accommodations is disheartening and appalling. One of the primary reasons would be the lack of visibility of disabled people in the mainstream, which stems from a lack of accessibility. As a community, we are stuck in a vicious cycle that operates at the expense of people with disabilities. 
When a disabled person thinks of booking a flight to a destination, they have to think of many things. These are things that the rest of the world does not think about enough. The struggle begins with attempting to book seats near the entrance, as the airline may not provide access to an aisle wheelchair. Wheelchair users are asked to deposit their wheelchairs and use those at the airport as soon as they enter. This is a cause for concern: wheelchairs are not meant for a one-size-fits-all phenomenon. Most of them are extremely uncomfortable and may even become the cause of injury to some. As a disabled person, using the airport chair is one of the most harrowing parts of travelling. Due to my height,  my feet never reach the footrest, and I have to constantly hold my leg or risk an injury. This extremely hassling saga does not end here, for airports have separate wheelchairs for the aircraft, as the ones used on the ground do not fit the narrow entrance of an aeroplane. This means that wheelchair users have to shift to different chairs twice or even thrice if the chair malfunctions. I am someone who can shift herself from one surface to another independently, but many other people with various disabilities are unable to do so. This poses many problems as people travelling with the person will have to physically haul them multiple times, taking the risk of an injury either to themselves or the wheelchair user. Those who travel with elderly family members face even more issues with no help in sight. Solo travel for people with disabilities is almost always out of the question. You might think airlines provide support to them for these things because the option of asking for assistance at the airport is given in the online check-in form, but this assistance is seldom available in reality. More often than not, this assistance begins by providing a wheelchair, escorting them in it, and ending there. The fact that airline staff is not well trained to help only makes the journey tougher.
Staff at security check will ask a disabled person to stand, mostly because of the strict security protocols they have to follow. If people do not comply, as most disabled people cannot, some of them go as far as to tell people that they are faking their disability. Many such incidents have been reported, such as that of Sudha Chandran, an internationally acclaimed Bharatnatyam dancer who uses a prosthetic leg. She wrote an open letter to PM Modi, elaborating on how she was asked to remove the prosthetic limb for an EDT scan. The authorities later issued an apology.
 Although there have been changes to help make travel a disabled-friendly experience, such as the person being allowed to be in their own chair till the security check and seating them directly in an aisle chair- there is more to be done. Furthermore, these reforms have only been adopted by a few airlines. Many still do as they please due to the lack of accountability and no fear of complaints, capitalising on the fact that people are unaware of their rights. But even these recent improvements are a result of a constant battle many from the community have fought against the unfair treatment of people with disabilities by the ground staff of the airlines. In recent times, there have been various instances of people with disabilities being denied boarding by airlines. To address that, the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) has issued rules and regulations with the aim of helping disabled people gain fair access to air travel. 
In one of the most recent instances of denial of boarding, Indigo Airlines was accused of barring a child with disabilities from boarding the flight. The incident gained limelight after a witness narrated it in a Facebook post. The Indigo representative alleged that the child "was in a state of panic and therefore may be a threat to other passengers". Even after various others on the flight, including doctors and bureaucrats, tried to negotiate, the Indigo staff members did not budge. Ultimately, the flight took off sans three passengers standing at the locked boarding gate. This is just one of the many instances where a disabled person was denied access to something as basic as the right to fly, not so much due to his disability but because the world is plagued by ableist one-dimensional notions of 'normalcy' and what a so-called 'normal' human being looks like. 
Who holds these airlines accountable for the way they treat people? Is there a higher statutory body that governs their functioning and lays down the rules they need to adhere to? Yes! The Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) is the authority that holds airlines accountable for their conduct and functioning. They have rules and regulations clearly laid out for smooth travel for people with disabilities. 
In the forthcoming paragraphs, I will now discuss some of these provisions in detail, especially the ones concerning wheelchair users. 
One of the most essential and widely denied provisions laid down by the DGCA is the option given to a passenger to use their own wheelchair. A wheelchair user is allowed to use their own chair if it conforms to the specifications laid down by the Disabled Persons Transport Advisory Committee of the UK. The wheelchairs are stored within the aircraft and given to the passengers to be used to disembark. They are supposed to help passengers with disabilities embark and disembark the plane before others or at the end to ensure easy access for them. To help smoothen the check-in process, airlines have to put tags with the signs of their assistive devices and a tag number on their luggage. 
The airlines are also responsible for providing temporary replacements in case a personal wheelchair is damaged, which also seems to be one reason why they seldom allow passengers to use their own wheelchairs once inside the airport. Not just the airport but also the airline are directed to provide extra on-ground wheelchairs for the convenience of travellers. 
Airlines are also directed to provide accessible seats to disabled passengers that do not obstruct the crew from performing their tasks in emergency evacuation paths or create issues during an emergency evacuation.
If a disabled person is travelling with someone, they should be given a seat next to them as the highest priority. 
Airlines are also liable for taking care of wheelchairs and tagging them properly for easy identification. They should ensure it is carried in the same aircraft as the passenger. Airlines are supposed to allow the carriage of assistive devices weighing up to 15 kg free of charge as additional baggage, subject to the aircraft's limitations.
Passengers who have a condition that may be contagious, may get aggravated during the journey, or may need special devices to aid health during the journey are advised to keep a medical certificate in hand to state that they can complete the journey and the disease would not communicate to other passengers, assuring that they would take necessary precautions to avoid such an issue. If they have a connecting flight, the first airline they submit the certificate to is supposed to relay this information to the next carrier. 
DGCA mandates training of all staff at an airport, covering topics like barriers faced by people with disabilities, the range of disabilities (those mentioned in the RPWD act and beyond), developing the interpersonal skills to handle passengers with disabilities and general knowledge of health and well-being. On-ground staff should also be well aware of various provisions and facilities airlines have to provide to passengers with disabilities. 
Many other responsibilities have been bestowed upon airlines, operators, and other on-ground staff when it comes to making flying a disabled-friendly experience. Still, these were some of the significant provisions made by the DGCA for a smooth flying experience for passengers with disabilities.
Over the last few years, we have seen significant improvements in the flying experience of people with disabilities. Airlines have listened to the grievances aired by flyers and worked to ensure a change is visible. However, it wouldn't be wrong to say that there is still scope for improvement that can be made through clear clauses put in place by airlines to avoid ambiguity on the part of passengers and the on-ground staff that assists them. Enhancing the training protocols for ground staff may also be a good way to ensure the smooth functioning of the entire machinery for both staff and passengers. 
